Quantum Algorithmic Primitives
******************************
**[1]** The general philosophy of the CUDA-Q specification is that quantum 
device code should be encapsulated as stand-alone callable instances of generic 
signature, and that operations or primitive algorithms targeting a quantum 
coprocessor be implemented as adaptors on those callable instances. Adaptors, by 
definition, are generic functions that take any quantum kernel as input along with 
the runtime arguments for that kernel. Runtime arguments passed to adaptor functions 
flow through the adaptor to the provided kernel. This pattern allows general pre- 
and post-processing around concrete kernel execution. 

.. _cudaq-sample-spec:

:code:`cudaq::sample`
-------------------------
**[1]** A common task for near-term quantum execution is to sample the state
of a given quantum circuit for a specified number of shots (circuit
executions). The result of this task is typically a mapping of observed
measurement bit strings to the number of times each was observed. This
is typically termed the counts dictionary in the community. 

**[2]** The CUDA-Q model enables this functionality via template functions within the
:code:`cudaq` namespace with the following structure:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template <typename ReturnType>
    concept HasVoidReturnType = std::is_void_v<ReturnType>;

    // Kernel only
    template<typename QuantumKernel, typename... Args>
      requires HasVoidReturnType<QuantumKernel, Args...>
    sample_result sample(QuantumKernel&& kernel, Args&&... args);

    // Specify shots
    template<typename QuantumKernel, typename... Args>
      requires HasVoidReturnType<QuantumKernel, Args...>
    sample_result sample(std::size_t shots, QuantumKernel&& kernel, Args&&... args);

    // Specify sample options (including shots and noise model)
    template<typename QuantumKernel, typename... Args>
      requires HasVoidReturnType<QuantumKernel, Args...>
    sample_result sample(const sample_options &options,
                         QuantumKernel&& kernel, Args&&... args);

**[3]** This function takes as input a quantum kernel instance followed by the
concrete arguments at which the kernel should be invoked. CUDA-Q kernels 
passed to this function must be entry-point kernels and return :code:`void`. 

**[4]** Overloaded functions exist for specifying the number of shots to sample and the
noise model to apply.

**[5]** The function returns an instance of the :code:`cudaq::sample_result` type which encapsulates
the counts dictionary produced by the sampling task. Programmers can
extract the result information in the following manner: 

.. tab:: C++ 

  .. code-block:: cpp

      auto bell = []() __qpu__ { ... };
      
      // Sample the state generated by bel
      auto counts = cudaq::sample(bell)
  
      // Print to standard out
      counts.dump();
  
      // Fine-grained access to the bits and counts
      for (auto& [bits, count] : counts) {
        printf("Observed: %s, %lu\n", bits, count);
      }

.. tab:: Python 

  .. code-block:: python 

    @cudaq.kernel()
    def bell(): 
       ... 
    
    # Sample the state generated by bell
    counts = cudaq.sample(bell) 

    # Print to standard out
    counts.dump()

    # Fine-grained access to the bits and counts 
    for bits, count in counts:
        print('Observed: {}, {}'.format(bits, count))


**[6]** CUDA-Q specifies the following structure for :code:`cudaq::sample_result`:

.. code-block:: cpp 

    namespace cudaq {
      using CountsDictionary = std::unordered_map<std::string, std::size_t>;
      inline static const std::string GlobalRegisterName = "__global__";
      class sample_result {
        public:
          sample_result() = default;
          sample_result(const sample_result &);
          ~sample_result();
          
          std::vector<std::string> register_names();
          
          std::size_t count(std::string_view bitString,
                      const std::string_view registerName = GlobalRegisterName);
          
          std::vector<std::string>
          sequential_data(const std::string_view registerName = GlobalRegisterName);
          
          CountsDictionary
          to_map(const std::string_view registerName = GlobalRegisterName);
          
          sample_result
          get_marginal(const std::vector<std::size_t> &&marginalIndices,
                 const std::string_view registerName = GlobalRegisterName);

          double expectation(const std::string_view registerName == GlobalRegisterName);
          double probability(std::string_view bitString, const std::string_view registerName == GlobalRegisterName);
          std::size_t size(const std::string_view registerName == GlobalRegisterName);
          
          void dump();
          void clear();

          CountsDictionary::iterator begin();
          CountsDictionary::iterator end();
      };
    }

**[7]** By default the :code:`sample_result` type enables one to encode 
measurement results from a quantum circuit sampling task. It keeps track of a 
list of sample results, each one corresponding to a measurement action during 
the sampling process and represented by a unique register name. It also tracks 
a unique global register, which by default, contains the implicit sampling of 
the state at the end of circuit execution. If the :code:`explicit_measurements` 
sample option is enabled, the global register contains all measurements 
concatenated together in the order the measurements occurred in the kernel. 
The API gives fine-grain access to the measurement results for each register. 
To illustrate this, observe 

.. tab:: C++ 

  .. code-block:: cpp

    auto kernel = []() __qpu__ {
      cudaq::qubit q;
      h(q);
      auto reg1 = mz(q);
      reset (q);
      x(q);
    };
    
    printf("Default - no explicit measurements\n");
    cudaq::sample(kernel).dump();

    cudaq::sample_options options{.explicit_measurements = true};
    printf("Setting `explicit_measurements` option\n");
    cudaq::sample(options, kernel).dump();

.. tab:: Python 

  .. code-block:: python 

    @cudaq.kernel()
    def kernel():
       q = cudaq.qubit()
       h(q)
       reg1 = mz(q)
       reset(q)
       x(q)
    
    print("Default - no explicit measurements")
    cudaq.sample(kernel).dump()

    print("Setting `explicit_measurements` option")
    cudaq.sample(kernel, explicit_measurements=True).dump() 

should produce 

.. code-block:: bash 

    Default - no explicit measurements
    { 
      __global__ : { 1:1000 }
      reg1 : { 0:506 1:494 }
    }

    Setting `explicit_measurements` option
    { 0:479 1:521 }

Here we see that we have measured a qubit in a uniform superposition to a 
register named :code:`reg1`, and followed it with a reset and the application 
of an NOT operation. By default the :code:`sample_result` returned for this 
sampling tasks contains the default :code:`__global__` register as well as the 
user specified :code:`reg1` register. 

The contents of the :code:`__global__` register will depend on how your kernel
is written:

1. If no measurements appear in the kernel, then the :code:`__global__` 
   register is formed with implicit measurements being added for *all* the 
   qubits defined in the kernel, and the measurements all occur at the end of 
   the kernel. This is not supported when sampling with the 
   :code:`explicit_measurements` option; kernels executed with 
   :code:`explicit_measurements` mode must contain measurements.   
   The order of the bits in the bitstring corresponds to the qubit
   allocation order specified in the kernel.  That is - the :code:`[0]` element
   in the :code:`__global__` bitstring corresponds with the first declared qubit
   in the kernel. For example,

.. tab:: C++ 

   .. code-block:: cpp

       auto kernel = []() __qpu__ {
         cudaq::qubit a, b;
         x(a);
       };
       cudaq::sample(kernel).dump();

.. tab:: Python 

  .. code-block:: python 

    @cudaq.kernel 
    def kernel():
        a, b = cudaq.qubit(), cudaq.qubit() 
        x(a) 
    
    cudaq.sample(kernel).dump() 

should produce 

   .. code-block:: bash 

       { 
         __global__ : { 10:1000 }
       }

2. Conversely, if any measurements appear in the kernel, then only the measured
   qubits will appear in the :code:`__global__` register. Similar to #1, the 
   bitstring corresponds to the qubit allocation order specified in the kernel.
   Also (again, similar to #1), the values of the sampled qubits always 
   correspond to the values *at the end of the kernel execution*, unless the 
   :code:`explicit_measurements` option is enabled. That is - if a qubit is 
   measured in the middle of a kernel and subsequent operations change the state
   of the qubit, the qubit will be implicitly re-measured at the end of the 
   kernel, and that re-measured value is the value that will appear in the 
   :code:`__global__` register. If the sampling option :code:`explicit_measurements` 
   is enabled, then no re-measurements occur, and the global register contains 
   the concatenated measurements in the order they were executed in the kernel.

.. tab:: C++ 

   .. code-block:: cpp

       auto kernel = []() __qpu__ {
         cudaq::qubit a, b;
         x(a);
         mz(b);
         mz(a);
       };
       
       printf("Default - no explicit measurements\n");
       cudaq::sample(kernel).dump();

       cudaq::sample_options options{.explicit_measurements = true};
       printf("Setting `explicit_measurements` option\n");
       cudaq::sample(options, kernel).dump();

.. tab:: Python 

  .. code-block:: python 

    @cudaq.kernel
    def kernel():
        a, b = cudaq.qubit(), cudaq.qubit()
        x(a)
        mz(b)
        mz(a)

    print("Default - no explicit measurements")
    cudaq.sample(kernel).dump()

    print("Setting `explicit_measurements` option")
    cudaq.sample(kernel, explicit_measurements=True).dump()
  
should produce 

   .. code-block:: bash 

       Default - no explicit measurements
       { 10:1000 }

       Setting `explicit_measurements` option
       { 01:1000 }

.. note::

  If you don't specify any measurements in your kernel and allow the :code:`nvq++`
  compiler to perform passes that introduce ancilla qubits into your kernel, it
  may be difficult to discern which qubits are the ancilla qubits vs which ones
  are your qubits. In this case, it is recommended that you provide explicit
  measurements in your kernel in order to only receive measurements from your
  qubits and silently discard the measurements from the ancillary qubits.

**[8]** The API exposed by the :code:`sample_result` data type allows one to extract
the information contained at a variety of levels and for each available 
register name. One can get the number of times a bit string was observed via 
:code:`sample_result::count`, extract a `std::unordered_map` representation via 
:code:`sample_result::to_map`, get a new :code:`sample_result` instance over a subset of 
measured qubits via :code:`sample_result::get_marginal`, and extract the 
measurement data as it was produced sequentially (a vector of bit string observations 
for each shot in the sampling process). One can also compute probabilities and expectation 
values. 

**[9]** There are specific requirements on input quantum kernels for the use of the
sample function which must be enforced by compiler implementations. The kernel 
must be an entry-point kernel that returns :code:`void`.

**[10]** CUDA-Q also provides an asynchronous version of this function 
(:code:`cudaq::sample_async`) which returns a :code:`sample_async_result`. 

.. code-block:: cpp 

    template<typename QuantumKernel, typename... Args>
    async_sample_result sample_async(const std::size_t qpu_id, QuantumKernel&& kernel, Args&&... args);

Programmers can asynchronously launch sampling tasks on any :code:`qpu_id`. 

**[11]** The :code:`async_sample_result` wraps a :code:`std::future<sample_result>` and exposes the same 
:code:`get()` functionality to extract the results after asynchronous execution. 

**[12]** For remote QPU systems with long queue times, the :code:`async_sample_result` type encodes job ID 
information and can be persisted to file and loaded from file at a later time. After loading from file, 
and when remote queue jobs are completed, one can invoke :code:`get()` and the results will 
be retrieved and returned. 

:code:`cudaq::run`
-------------------------
**[1]** The :code:`cudaq::run` API allows programmers to execute a kernel a specified number 
of times and retrieve all the individual values returned. Unlike :code:`cudaq::sample`, which 
collects measurement statistics as a counts dictionary mapping bit strings to frequencies, :code:`run` 
preserves each individual return value from every execution. Use :code:`sample` when you need 
quantum state measurement statistics, and use :code:`run` when you need to analyze individual 
return values from each circuit execution.

**[2]** The CUDA-Q model provides this functionality via template functions within the
:code:`cudaq` namespace with the following structure:

.. code-block:: cpp

    // Run a kernel for specified number of shots 
    template <typename QuantumKernel, typename... ARGS>
      requires(!std::is_void_v<std::invoke_result_t<std::decay_t<QuantumKernel>, std::decay_t<ARGS>...>>)
    std::vector<std::invoke_result_t<std::decay_t<QuantumKernel>, std::decay_t<ARGS>...>>
    run(std::size_t shots, QuantumKernel &&kernel, ARGS &&...args);

    // Run a kernel with noise model for specified number of shots
    template <typename QuantumKernel, typename... ARGS>
      requires(!std::is_void_v<std::invoke_result_t<std::decay_t<QuantumKernel>, std::decay_t<ARGS>...>>)
    std::vector<std::invoke_result_t<std::decay_t<QuantumKernel>, std::decay_t<ARGS>...>>
    run(std::size_t shots, cudaq::noise_model &noise_model, QuantumKernel &&kernel, ARGS &&...args);

**[3]** This function takes as input the number of shots, a quantum kernel instance, and the
concrete arguments with which the kernel should be invoked. CUDA-Q kernel passed to this
function must be an entry-point kernel and must return a non-void value.

**[4]** Overloaded function exists for specifying a noise model to apply during execution.

**[5]** The function returns a :code:`std::vector` containing the return values from each execution 
of the kernel. The vector has a length equal to the number of specified shots, with each element 
representing the return value of a single kernel execution.

**[6]** Programmers can extract the result information in the following manner:

.. tab:: C++

  .. code-block:: cpp

      auto kernel = [](int numQubits) __qpu__ {
        // Quantum code that returns an int
        cudaq::qvector q(numQubits);
        h(q);
        // some logic...
        return result;
      };
      
      // Run the kernel 100 times with 4 qubits
      auto results = cudaq::run(100, kernel, 4);
  
      // Process the results
      for (const auto& result : results) {
        printf("Result: %d\n", result);
      }

.. tab:: Python

  .. code-block:: python

    @cudaq.kernel
    def kernel(numQubits: int) -> int:
        # Quantum code that returns an int
        q = cudaq.qvector(numQubits)
        h(q)
        # some logic...
        return result
    
    # Run the kernel 100 times with 4 qubits
    results = cudaq.run(kernel, 4, shots_count=100)
    
    # Process the results
    for result in results:
        print(f"Result: {result}")

**[7]** The :code:`cudaq::run` function supports a variety of return types from the quantum kernel:

- Scalar types: :code:`bool`, :code:`int`, :code:`float`, and their variants (:code:`int8/16/32/64`, :code:`float32/64`)
- Vector/List types: :code:`std::vector<T>` in C++ and :code:`list[T]` in Python, where :code:`T` can be :code:`bool`, :code:`int`, :code:`float`, and their variants 
- User-defined data structures (via custom structs in C++ or :code:`dataclass` in Python)

**[7.1]** Note: Nested or aggregate vectors / lists / structs (e.g., :code:`list[list[int]]`) are not yet supported.

**[7.2]** For Python, tuple return types are supported with limitations:

- Elements can be scalar types (:code:`bool`, :code:`int`, :code:`float`)
- Tuple elements are immutable and cannot be modified within the kernel
- Note: :code:`std::tuple` is not supported in C++ - use custom structs instead

**[7.3]** For Python, :code:`dataclass` return types are supported with limitations:

- Must use :code:`@dataclass(slots=True)` decorator
- Cannot contain user-defined methods beyond generated ones
- Can be created and modified within the kernel using :code:`.copy()` for modifications

**[8]** There are specific requirements on input quantum kernels for the use of the
:code:`run` function which must be enforced by compiler implementations:

- The kernel must be an entry-point kernel
- The kernel must return a non-void value
- The kernel must have a return statement in all code paths

**[9]** CUDA-Q also provides an asynchronous version of this function
(:code:`cudaq::run_async`) which returns a :code:`std::future`:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template <typename QuantumKernel, typename... ARGS>
      requires(!std::is_void_v<std::invoke_result_t<std::decay_t<QuantumKernel>, std::decay_t<ARGS>...>>)
    std::future<std::vector<std::invoke_result_t<std::decay_t<QuantumKernel>, std::decay_t<ARGS>...>>>
    run_async(std::size_t qpu_id, std::size_t shots, QuantumKernel &&kernel, ARGS &&...args);

Programmers can asynchronously launch kernel executions on any :code:`qpu_id` and retrieve results 
when ready using the returned future's :code:`get()` method.


:code:`cudaq::observe`
-------------------------
**[1]** A common task in variational algorithms is the computation of the expected
value of a given observable with respect to a parameterized quantum circuit
(:math:`\langle H \rangle(𝚹) = \langle \psi(𝚹)|H|\psi(𝚹) \rangle`). 

**[2]** The :code:`cudaq::observe` function is provided to enable one to quickly compute
this expectation value via execution of the parameterized quantum circuit
with repeated measurements in the bases of the provided :code:`spin_op` terms. The
function has the following signature:

.. code-block:: cpp
  
    // Kernel only
    template<typename QuantumKernel, typename... Args>
    observe_result observe(QuantumKernel&&, cudaq::spin_op&, Args&&... args);
    
    // Specify shots
    template<typename QuantumKernel, typename... Args>
    observe_result observe(std::size_t shots, QuantumKernel&&, cudaq::spin_op&, Args&&... args);

    // Specify sample options (including shots and noise model)
    template<typename QuantumKernel, typename... Args>
    observe_result observe(const cudaq::observe_options &options,
                          QuantumKernel&&, cudaq::spin_op&, Args&&... args);

**[3]** :code:`cudaq::observe` takes as input an instantiated quantum kernel, the
:code:`cudaq::spin_op` whose expectation is requested, and the concrete
arguments used as input to the parameterized quantum kernel. 

**[4]** :code:`cudaq::observe` returns an instance of the :code:`observe_result` type which can be implicitly 
converted to a :code:`double` expectation value, but also retains all data directly
generated and used as part of that expectation value computation. The 
:code:`observe_result` takes on the following form:

.. code-block:: cpp

    class observe_result {
      public:
        observe_result(double &e, spin_op &H);
        observe_result(double &e, spin_op &H, MeasureCounts counts);

        sample_results raw_data() { return data; };
        operator double();
        double expectation();
        
        template <typename SpinOpType>
        double expectation(SpinOpType term);

        template <typename SpinOpType>
        sample_result counts(SpinOpType term);
        double id_coefficient() 
        void dump();
    };

**[5]** The public API for :code:`observe_result` enables one to extract the 
:code:`sample_result` data for each term in the provided :code:`spin_op`. 
This return type can be used in the following way.

.. tab:: C++ 

  .. code-block:: cpp 

      // I only care about the expected value, discard 
      // the fine-grain data produced
      double expVal = cudaq::observe(kernel, spinOp, args...);

      // I require the result with all generated data 
      auto result = cudaq::observe(kernel, spinOp, args...);
      auto expVal = result.expectation();
      auto X0X1Exp = result.expectation(x(0)*x(1));
      auto X0X1Data = result.counts(x(0)*x(1));
      result.dump();

.. tab:: Python 

  .. code-block:: python 

    # I require the result with all generated data 
    result = cudaq::observe(kernel, spinOp, *args)
    expVal = result.expectation()
    X0X1Exp = result.expectation(x(0)*x(1))
    X0X1Data = result.counts(x(0)*x(1))
    result.dump()


Here is an example of the utility of the :code:`cudaq::observe` function:

.. tab:: C++ 

  .. code-block:: cpp

      struct ansatz {
        auto operator()(double theta) __qpu__ {
          cudaq::qarray<2> q;
          x(q[0]);
          ry(theta, q[1]);
          x<cudaq::ctrl>(q[1], q[0]);
        }
      };
    
      int main() {    
        spin_op h = 5.907 - 2.1433 * cudaq::spin_op::x(0) * cudaq::spin_op::x(1) - 
                    2.1433 * cudaq::spin_op::y(0) * cudaq::spin_op::y(1) +
                    .21829 * cudaq::spin_op::z(0) - 6.125 * cudaq::spin_op::z(1);
    
        double energy = cudaq::observe(ansatz{}, h, .59);
        printf("Energy is %lf\n", energy); 
        return 0;
      }

.. tab:: Python 

  .. code-block:: python 

    @cudaq.kernel()
    def ansatz(theta : float): 
       q = cudaq.qvector(2)
       x(q[0])
       ry(theta, q[1])
       x.ctrl(q[1], q[0])
    
    h = 5.907 - 2.1433 * x(0) * x(1) - 2.1433 * y(0) * y(1) +
                    .21829 * z(0) - 6.125 * z(1)
    energy = cudaq.observe(ansatz, h, .59).expectation() 
    print('Energy is {}'.format(energy))


**[5]** There are specific requirements on input quantum kernels for the use of the
observe function which must be enforced by compiler implementations. The
kernel must be an entry-point kernel that does not contain any conditional
or measurement statements.

**[6]** By default on simulation backends, :code:`cudaq::observe` computes the true
analytic expectation value (i.e. without stochastic noise due to shots-based sampling). 
If a specific shot count is provided then the returned expectation value will contain some 
level of statistical noise. Overloaded :code:`observe` functions are provided to 
specify the number of shots and/or specify the noise model to apply.

**[7]** CUDA-Q also provides an asynchronous version of this function 
(:code:`cudaq::observe_async`) which returns a :code:`async_observe_result`. 

.. code-block:: cpp 

    template<typename QuantumKernel, typename... Args>
    async_observe_result observe_async(const std::size_t qpu_id, QuantumKernel&& kernel, cudaq::spin_op&, Args&&... args);

Programmers can asynchronously launch sampling tasks on any :code:`qpu_id`. 

**[8]** For remote QPU systems with long queue times, the :code:`async_observe_result` type encodes job ID 
information for each execution and can be persisted to file and loaded from file at a later time. After loading from file, 
and when remote queue jobs are completed, one can invoke :code:`get()` and the results will 
be retrieved and returned. 

:code:`cudaq::optimizer` (deprecated, functionality moved to CUDA-Q libraries)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The primary use case for :code:`cudaq::observe` is to leverage it as
the core of a broader objective function optimization workflow. 
:code:`cudaq::observe` produces the expected value of a specified 
:code:`spin_op` with respect to a given parameterized ansatz at a concrete
set of parameters, and often programmers will require an extremal value of that expected value 
at a specific set of concrete parameters. This will directly require
abstractions for gradient-based and gradient-free optimization strategies. 

The CUDA-Q model provides a :code:`cudaq::optimizer` data type that exposes
an :code:`optimize()` method that takes as input an 
:code:`optimizable_function` to optimize and the number of independent
function dimensions. Implementations are free to implement this abstraction
in any way that is pertinent, but it is expected that most approaches will
enable optimization strategy extensibility. For example, programmers should
be able to instantiate a specific :code:`cudaq::optimizer` sub-type, thereby 
dictating the underlying optimization algorithm in a type-safe manner. 
Moreover, the optimizer should expose a public API of pertinent optimizer-specific 
options that the programmer can customize.

CUDA-Q models the :code:`cudaq::optimizer` as follows:

.. code-block:: cpp 

    namespace cudaq {
      // Encode the optimal value and optimal parameters
      using optimization_result = std::tuple<double, std::vector<double>>;
      // Initialized with user specified callable of a specific signature
      // Clients can query if the function computes gradients or not
      class optimizable_function {
        public:
          template<typename Callable>
          optimizable_function(Callable&&);
          bool providesGradients() { return _providesGradients; }
          double operator()(const std::vector<double> &x, std::vector<double> &dx);
      };
      class optimizer {
        public:
          virtual bool requiresGradients() = 0;
          virtual optimization_result optimize(const int dimensions,
                                              optimizable_function&& opt_function) = 0;
      }; 
    }

Here, :code:`optimization_result` should encode the optimal value and optimal
parameters achieved during the optimization workflow
(i.e. a :code:`tuple<double, std::vector<double>>`). The optimize method takes
as input the number of parameters (or dimensions of the objective function),
and a function-like object (i.e. :code:`std::function` or a lambda, something 
:code:`optimizable_function` can be constructed from) that takes a 
:code:`const std::vector<double>&` and :code:`std::vector<double>&` for the
function input parameters and gradient vector, respectively. The objective
function must return a double representing the scalar cost for the
objective function (e.g. the expected value from :code:`cudaq::observe()`).  

Here is an example of how the :code:`cudaq::optimizer` is intended to be used: 

.. code-block:: cpp 

    auto ansatz = [](double theta, double phi) __qpu__ {...};
    cudaq::spin_op H = ... ;
  
    cudaq::optimizers::cobyla optimizer;
    optimizer.max_eval = 200;
  
    auto [opt_energy, opt_params] = optimizer.optimize(
          2, [&](const std::vector<double> &x, std::vector<double> &grad_vec) {
            return cudaq::observe(ansatz, H, x[0], x[1]);
          });

:code:`cudaq::gradient` (deprecated, functionality moved to CUDA-Q libraries)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Typical optimization use cases will require the computation of gradients for the specified
objective function. The gradient is a vector over all ansatz circuit
parameters :math:`∂H(𝚹) / ∂𝚹_i`. There are a number of potential strategies for
computing this gradient vector, but most require additional evaluations
of the ansatz circuit on the quantum processor. 

To enable true extensibility in gradient strategies, CUDA-Q programmers can
instantiate custom sub-types of the :code:`cudaq::gradient` type. The :code:`cudaq::gradient`
type defines a :code:`compute(...)` method that takes a mutable reference to the 
current gradient vector and is free to update that vector in a strategy-specific way. 
The method also takes the current evaluation parameter vector, the :code:`cudaq::spin_op` used 
in the current variational task, and the computed expected value at the given parameters. 
The gradient strategy type takes the following form:

.. code-block:: cpp

    namespace cudaq {
      class gradient {
        public:
          gradient(std::function<void(std::vector<double>)> &&kernel);
  
          template <typename QuantumKernel, typename ArgsMapper>
          gradient(QuantumKernel &&kernel, ArgsMapper &&argsMapper);
  
          virtual void compute(std::vector<double>& x, std::vector<double> &dx,
                            spin_op& h, double exp_h) = 0;
          
          virtual std::vector<double>
          compute(const std::vector<double> &x,
                  std::function<double(std::vector<double>)> &func) = 0;

      };
  
      // gradient is intended for subclassing
      class central_difference : public gradient {
        public:
          void compute(std::vector<double>& x, std::vector<double> &dx, spin_op& h,
                  double exp_h) override { ... }
      };
    }

The :code:`compute` function can make use of the quantum kernel parameterized ansatz, the 
:code:`spin_op` for which the expected value is being computed, the
pre-computed expected value at the current iteration's parameter, and the
concrete arguments for the given quantum kernel at this iteration.

A non-trivial aspect of the computation of gradients (in an extensible manner)
is that we model the gradient as a derivative over concrete parameters for the
circuit ansatz represented as a :code:`std::vector<double>` when the actual
quantum kernel may be defined with general variadic :code:`Args...` types.
To address this issue, programmers can provide a default translation
mechanism for mapping common quantum kernel ansatz functional expressions to a :code:`vector<double>` representation - the 
:code:`ArgsMapper` callable template type. This type must implement the 
:code:`std::tuple<Args...>(std::vector<double>&)` callable concept. 

The overall CUDA-Q workflow for leveraging the :code:`cudaq::optimizer`
will work as follows (here we demonstrate with an ansatz without the
default :code:`std::vector<double>` signature):

.. code-block:: cpp

    auto deuteron_n3_ansatz = [](double x0, double x1) __qpu__ {
      cudaq::qarray<3> q;
      x(q[0]);
      ry(x0, q[1]);
      ry(x1, q[2]);
      x<cudaq::ctrl>(q[2], q[0]);
      x<vctrl>(q[0], q[1]);
      ry(-x0, q[1]);
      x<cudaq::ctrl>(q[0], q[1]);
      x<cudaq::ctrl>(q[1], q[0]);
    };

    cudaq::spin_op h = 5.907 - 2.1433 * x(0) * x(1) - 2.1433 * y(0) * y(1) +
              .21829 * z(0) - 6.125 * z(1);
    cudaq::spin_op h3 = h + 9.625 - 9.625 * z(2) - 3.913119 * x(1) * x(2) -
                3.913119 * y(1) * y(2);

    // The above ansatz takes 2 doubles, not a single std::vector<double>, which 
    // the gradient type is expecting. So we must provide an ArgsMapper callable type
    auto argsMapper = [](std::vector<double> x) {return std::make_tuple(x[0],x[1]);};

    // Create the gradient strategy
    cudaq::gradients::central_difference gradient(deuteron_n3_ansatz, argsMapper);

    // Create the L-BFGS optimizer, requires gradients
    cudaq::optimizers::lbfgs optimizer;

    // Run the optimization routine. 
    auto [min_val, opt_params] = optimizer.optimize(
        2, [&](const std::vector<double>& x, std::vector<double>& grad_vec) {
          // Compute the cost, here its an energy
          auto cost = cudaq::observe(deuteron_n3_ansatz, h3, x);
          
          // Compute the gradient, results written to the grad_vec reference
          gradient.compute(x, grad_vec, h3, cost);

          // Return the cost to the optimizer
          return cost;
        });

    // Print the results
    printf("Optimizer found %lf at [%lf,%lf]\n", min_val, opt_params[0], opt_params[1]);
